## Ion Permeation and Selectivity in Voltage-gated Sodium Channels PhD Thesis
Christopher Ing, University of Toronto, 2018

# Abstract
Voltage-gated sodium channels are responsible for the initiation and propagation of electrical signals in living organisms. Though the function of these channels are well-described in humans, many questions remain at the microscopic level with respect to the relationship between their structure, function, and connection to human health and disease. The elucidation of high-resolution structures of sodium channels enables the use of computational models to connect microscopic biophysical measurements to macroscopic experimental observables. In this work, we present extensive molecular dynamics studies of the bacterial voltage-gated sodium channel NavAb to examine the molecular basis for four key mechanisms underlying the generation of action potentials in excitable cells; ionic conduction, selectivity, gating, and leakage. Our simulations support a molecular mechanism for ionic conduction involving a strong coupling between the conformational isomerization (dunking) of glutamic acid sidechains and ionic conduction. We determined single-point mutations which modulate dunking and ionic conduction and enable experimental validation of this hypothesis. Building on this mechanism, we present a model for Na+ selectivity over K+ in NavAb that results from differences in ionic desolvation penalties within the selectivity filter (SF) and the capability of channel fluctuations to facilitate multi-ion occupancy. The presence of three ions within the SF results in a diffusive free-energy landscape for Na+ whereas K+ conduction is comparatively restricted. We describe a mechanism for Na+ permeation at the intracellular gate wherein fluctuations between a wetted and dewetted state modulate the free-energy of conduction in this region. Lastly, we studied the molecular basis of Na+ leakage in the voltage-sensor of NavAb with analogous mutations linked to the hereditary disease periodic paralysis. Molecular simulations reveal a decrease in the free-energy barrier opposing Na+ permeation within the voltage sensor consistent with leakage, providing a structural basis for this disease that may facilitate treatment. Throughout this work, we quantify and compare the relationship between ionic desolvation and free-energy of ion conduction. Our studies have broad implications for understanding ion transport and permeation across the larger family of ion channels and have relevance to the treatment of patients suffering from diseases that result from abnormal function of channels.
